---
title: 'On Grassman, A1, the foundations of linear algebra, and dreams'
date: 2024-01-20
permalink: /posts/2024/01/post3/
tags:
  - math
---

<blockquote cite="https://users.aalto.fi/~asihvola/umig.pdf">
  <p>Ubi materia, ibi geometria</p>
  <footer>—Johannes Kepler, <cite>De fundamentis
astrologiae certioribus</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

\

No story is to me in mathematics more interesting than the emotionally charged end of the 19th century's
*vector wars*, the fight for which objects and conventions should be unilaterally used for expressing
vectors, their rotations and other geometrical operations.

The end to such a war is [well known](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_AaOFCl2ihc); *Gibbs'* treatise written conjuctly with Heaviside
ultimately skyrocketed to popularity because of its direct applications to electromagnetic
theory, and Hamilton's *quaternions* then sat idly by the side waiting for the mathematicians
to eventually pick them up again for [computer graphics](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=86MsWRvPjMw) and studies in [quantum theory](https://arxiv.org/abs/1101.5690).

Today's topic is of the extremely dismissed *geometric algebra* of the time, which has recently suffered
a renaissance by means of really enthusiastic members and great online content. More than 
lamenting how multivectors are not the universal expressions of physics and mathematics, I'd like to
review the historical basis for how they came to be, and why **Herman Grassman** was a one of a kind
individual.

Grassman is the founding father of linear algebra
=======

I'll start this examination by plainly stating this with no remorse. 

What does A1 actually say?
=======

A lot of documents briefly state A1's main results, namely, a description of solutions to 
Pfaffian system, Cramer's rules, and such, but I'd like to indulge in a bit more detail,
and showcase again *why* Grassman can be called a legitimate inventor of linear algebra.

The book starts with


Extensional Mechanics, or how to do geometric physics
========

On one of his seminal texts, called "[Mechanics, according to the principles
of the theory of extensions](http://neo-classical-physics.info/uploads/3/0/6/5/3065888/grassmann_-_mechanics_and_extensions.pdf)" of March of 1877, 
is interesting in how it historically fits with
other developments.

At page 6, section 2, he describes:

<q> The so-called *parallelogram law for force* can be expressed thus: If the effects of
several causes on the point $$x$$ equal the line segments $$p1, p2, \cdots,$$ when taken individually,
then the simultaneous effect $$p$$ of all of the causes is equal to the sum of the line segments
$$p = p1 + p2 + \cdots $$. Equation (1) is then also true when $$p$$ is the sum of all effects that the
various causes simultaneously exert on the moving point.<q>

First, I find the charming description "parallelogram law". Clifford Truesdell in his book
"The History of Mechanics" goes in great depth about this, but essentially, there were no vectorial
interpretations of force at the time, only vague geometrical statements about how to sum and
subtract forces acting on objects.

Here then, is the first "vectorial" treatment of forces in physics, expliciting using
base vectors $$\mathbf{e}_i$$ as the constructors of the force in a reference frame,
and carrying out algebra with them.

The rest of the article carries out with this logic, he gives a interesting derivation for
movement of oceanic flows and such, what he calls "eeb", it's a worth it quick read.


Ford's book
========

A particularity that has been mentioned already is how Grassman's work originally
talked about using "points" to construct other fundamental quantities; multiplying and subtracting
points to form vectors and rotors, rather than directly starting out with vectors and then building
*k-vectors* out of them.

A book that is far more readable than A1 is then Ford's "exterior calculus". It's not t

Grassman's death
========

I always found one of his last statements on the matter to be heartbreaking, and so I'll close
this post with it:

<blockquote cite="https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/231908059.pdf">
  <p>I remain completely conident that the labour I have expended on the science presented here and which has demanded a significant part of my life as well as the most strenuous application of my powers, will not be lost. It is true that I am aware that the form which I have given the science is imperfect and must be imperfect. 

But I know and feel obliged to state (though I run the risk of seeming arrogant) **that even if this work should again remain unused for another seventeen years or even longer, without entering into the actual development of science, still that time will come when it will be brought forth from the dust of oblivion and when ideas now dormant will bring forth fruit.**

I know that if I also fail to gather around me (as I have until now desired in vain) a circle of scholars, whom I could fructify with these ideas, and whom I could stimulate to develop and enrich them further, yet there will come a time when these ideas, perhaps in a new form, will arise anew and will enter into a living communication with contemporary developments. 

**For truth is eternal and divine and no phase of it ... can pass without a trace; it remains in existence even if the cloth in which weak mortals dress it disintegrates into dust.**</p>
  <footer>— Herman Grassman, <cite>Personal</cite></footer>
</blockquote>

References
===========

<ol>
  <li> <b> The Extension Theory of Hermann Grassmann and
the Creation of Vector Algebra, <b> Juho Vuorikoski</li>
</ol>